---
title: "Stacking Functions"
author: Jed Rembold
date: February 13, 2023
slideNumber: true
theme: "python_monokai"
highlightjs-theme: monokai
width: 1920
height: 1080
transition: slide
hash: true
history: false

---


## Announcements
:::{style='font-size: .9em'}
- I'm through all of the Karel problem from PS2 feedback, and so things are going faster now. Will be completely finished by tomorrow. Sorry for the delay.
- Have you started Wordle? If not, get started today!
  - 5 days for 5 milestones will give you plenty of time to figure things out and have some time for an extension if you want
- Yet again, my availability today is almost non-existent, but I'll be around for 30 min after class or after 5pm
- Another Visiting Faculty Candidate today!
  - Teaching Demonstration at noon (Smullin B17)
  - Research Talk at 1 (Smullin B17)
    - Using AI to write songs!
- Polling: [rembold-class.ddns.net](http://rembold-class.ddns.net)
:::

## Review Question {data-notes="Answer: None of the above, as nothing is returned"}
:::: cols
::: col
When the final line of the code to the right is run, what type of variable is `x`?

:::::{.poll}
#. `integer`{.no-highlight}
#. `float`{.no-highlight}
#. `string`{.no-highlight}
#. None of the above
:::::
:::

::: col
```python
def func(A):
	m = str(A)
	n = m + m + m
	print(n)

y = 5.0
x = func(y)
print(type(x))
```
:::
::::

## Parameter Purposes
- Often functions need some sort of outside input in order to be useful
- It is necessary for them to know enough details so that they can carry out the requested task, but not so many that the function becomes annoying to use
	- Imagine you were trying to accomplish the task yourself!
	- What is the minimum amount of information you would need to know?
- The minimum necessary information needed for the function to accomplish its task is generally the information conveyed in the parameters
- There is always a balance
	- More parameters makes your function more general, to be used elsewhere
	- More parameters are tedious and potentially error-prone to enter if unnecessary


## Jockeying for Position
- So far we have used a positional way to assign arguments to parameters

	```python-repl
	>>> def func( first, second, third ):
			print( first, second, third )
	>>> func(1,2,3)
	1 2 3
	>>> func(2,6,4)
	2 6 4
	```
	- First argument to first parameter, second to second parameter, etc

## The Word is Key
- Arguments may also be specified by a _keyword_, in which the caller precedes the argument with a parameter name and equals sign
- Always stores the argument value in the specified parameter
  ```python-repl
  >>>  def func( first, second, third ):
  		print( first, second, third )
  >>>  func(third=4, first=2, second=6)
  2 6 4
  ```
- Keyword arguments can appear in any order
- **All keyword arguments must come after any positional arguments!**

## Default Slide Title
- Python allows you to specify a default value for a parameter, which is will use if one is not directly supplied
- Do so by adding an equals sign and a value after the parameter name
  ```python
  def introduction(name='Jed', age=37):
  	print('My name is ', name, ' and I am ', age)
  ```
  - So you define default values when you define the function
- If, when calling a function, you are providing any further arguments after a default parameter, you must indicate them through keywords


## Default Example
  ```{.python-repl style="max-height: 800px"}
  >>> introduction()
  My name is Jed and I am 37
  >>> introduction('Bob', 25)
  My name is Bob and I am 25
  >>> introduction('Larry')
  My name is Larry and I am 37
  >>> introduction(age=68)
  My name is Jed and I am 68
  ```


## Returning Graphics
- You can `return` any type of variable from a function, including `GObject` graphical objects
- Can be useful to write simple functions that bundle together common tasks
- For instance, to create a filled circle centered at some location:
  ```{.python style='font-size:.85em'}
  def make_filled_circ(x_cent, y_cent, radius, color='black'):
  	circle = GOval( x_cent-radius, y_cent-radius, 
  				    2*radius, 2*radius)
  	circle.set_color(color)
  	circle.set_filled(True)
  	return circle
  ```

## Quite the Reader
- You can `return` any type of variable from a function, including `GObject` graphical objects
- Can be useful to write simple functions that bundle together common tasks
- Can create our own Python library by constructing a collection of constants or functions
- All code not in functions gets executed as soon as we `import` so generally don't want extraneous print statements or to be running any code directly
- Want the library to be in the same location as any code we want to `import` the library in


## PGL Help Library
```{.python style='max-height:800px; font-size:0.75em;'}
from pgl import GRect, GLabel
import random

def create_filled_rect(
	x_cent, y_cent, width, height, fill_col='black', border_col=None
):
	"""
	Creates a GRect object with the desired fill color. 
	If a border color is specified, also draws the 
	border in the desired color.
	"""
	rect = GRect(x_cent-width/2, y_cent-height/2, width, height)
	rect.set_filled(True)
	if border_col is None:
		rect.set_color(fill_col)
	else:
		rect.set_color(border_col)
		rect.set_fill_color(fill_col)
	return rect

def random_color():
	"""
	Returns a random opaque color as a hex string.
	"""
	color = "#"
	for i in range(6):
		color += random.choice("0123456789ABCDEF")
	return color

def create_centered_label(x_cent, y_cent, text, font=None):
	"""
	Creates a GLabel object and centers it on the coordinates
	x_cent and y_cent.
	"""
	label = GLabel(text)
	if font is not None:
		label.set_font(font)
	label.set_location(x_cent - label.get_width() / 2, 
					   y_cent + label.get_ascent() / 2 )
	return label
```


## Poll!
:::::cols
:::col
```python
def Vegas(x):
	y = 2
	for i in range(5):
		x += y
	return x

x = 3
z = Vegas(x)
print('z =', z)
print('x =', x)
```
:::
:::col
Consider the code to the left. When the final value of `x` is printed, what will its value be?

::::poll
#. 3
#. 5
#. 13
#. `None`{.no-highlight}
::::
:::
:::::


## Stacks and Scopes
- Functions really do work as self-contained little boxes or environments!
	- "What happens in `Vegas` stays in `Vegas`...
- Whenever Python enters a new function, you can envision that it gets out a fresh new board to keep track of that function's variables
	- What happens on that board does NOT affect whatever might have been defined or happened on other boards
	- Each board is commonly called a _stack frame_
- When Python finishes with a function and returns, the board or stack frame for that function is **thrown away**!


## Taking a Walk through Vegas
We'll annotate the stack frames by hand as the earlier code runs:

```{.python data-line-numbers=1-11|1|7|8|2|3|4|3|4|3|4|3|4|3|4|5|9|10 style="max-height:800px"}
def Vegas(x):
	y = 2
	for i in range(5):
		x += y
	return x

x = 3
z = Vegas(x)
print('z =', z)
print('x =', x)
```

## Summary of a Function Call 

:::{.incremental style='font-size:.8em'}
#. Evaluate the arguments in the context of the caller
#. Reserve space for the function in a new stack frame
#. Copy each positional argument to the corresponding parameter variable
#. Copy each keyword argument to the parameter with that name
#. For parameters with default values, if not already assigned, assign those values
#. Evaluate statements in the function body, using current stack frame to look up values of local variables
#. On encountering a `return`, compute the return value and substitute that value in place of the function call
#. Remove the stack frame
#. Return to the caller, continuing from just after the function call
:::

## Understanding Check {data-notes="Answer is 27"}

::::::cols
::::col
Riddle me this. What would be the printed value of z at the end of the code to the right?

:::{.poll}
#. 27
#. 25
#. 19
#. None of the above
:::

::::

::::col
```python
def f(x,y):
	z = (x + 3) ** 2
	return y + z

x = 1
z = x + f(y=x,x=2)
print(z)

```

::::
::::::

## Name Resolution and Scope
- When Python encounters a variable name in a program, it looks for where the variable was defined in an expanding search:
	1. **Local** - The local context is all the variables defined within the current function. This includes variables appearing as a parameter!
	2. **Enclosing** - The enclosing context consists of the names defined in a function enclosing the current one.
	3. **Global** - The global context consists of names defined outside of any function or imported into the current module.
	4. **Built-in** - The last place Python looks is in the names of any built-in functions, like `abs`, `str`, `print`, etc.
- The part of a program in which a name is defined in called its _scope_

## Scoping Example
```{.python style='max-height:900px'}
def func1(x,y):
	return z + func2(x,y)

def func2(x,y):
	def func3(x):
		return (y + x) ** 2

	z = x - func3(y)
	return z - y


z = 1
print(func1(2,z))
```

## Local Variables
- In Python, assigning any value to a variable means that the variable is assumed to be _local_
	- This generally makes sense, as you would not want more specific functions overriding variables in other areas
- Can lead to issues though:
  ```{.python .badcode}
  def increment():
  	  x = x + 1
  
  x = 0
  increment()
  ```
- There are a few ways to address this, but we'll focus on one in particular when it comes to PGL

