---
title: "Scoping Out Functions"
author: Jed Rembold & Fred Agbo
date: October 2, 2023
slideNumber: true
theme: "python_monokai"
highlightjs-theme: monokai
width: 1920
height: 1080
transition: slide
hash: true
history: false

---


## Announcements
- Remember the due date for Problem 1 is ***tomorrow at 12 noon***.
- I'm still tackling with PS3, will be done ASAP! Apologies for the delay.
- We will enter Ch 6 this week in the text, which is a return to graphics
- Before that, we will talk about the following:  
	- Some quick information about your 1st mid-term test taking place on **Friday 6th Oct**
	- Ch 5 - Scoping Function - 
- I suggested some of you to attend the BoT luncheon- watchout for the email invite.
- Polling continues today! Remember to use this link [https://www.polleverywhere.com/agbofred203](https://www.polleverywhere.com/agbofred203) when it becomes **active**



<!--
## Wordle Tidbits
- Two useful ideas for Wordle:
	- You can check if an individual element is in a particular sequence of elements using the `in` keyword
	  
	  ```python
	  "1" in "12345"
	  ```
	  - Always returns a boolean (True/False)
	- You can change the case of all letters in a string using `upper()` or `lower()` methods
	  
	  ```python
	  lowered = "ABCDEF".lower()
	  uppered = "abcDEF".upper()
	  ```
	  - The method returns a **new** string, so make sure you assign it to something
-->
## Mid-term test
- Test will take place during the class time **9:10 - 10:10 0n Friday**.
- Those with accommodations should already contact the testing center and cc me.
- Practice questions are posted on this week's module
- Basic things to keep in mind:
	- The test contain detailed information to guide on what to expect. ***Read it carefully***
	- The exam is partially open, and thus you are free to utilize:
		- The text
		- Your notes
		- Class slides
		- Any past work you have done as part of sections, problem sets, or projects, provided it has been uploaded, and you access it through GitHub.

## Mid-term test 		
- You are allowed to use a computer for ease of typing and accessing the above resources, 
- You are **prohibited** from accessing and using any editor or terminal to run your code. 
	- Visual Studio Code or any similar editor should **never** be open on your computer during this exam. 
- Additionally, you are **prohibited** from accessing outside internet resources beyond the webpages described above.


## Review Question! {data-notes="Answer is 27"}

::::::cols
::::col
What would be the printed value of z at the end of the code to the right?

:::{.poll}
#. 19
#. 25
#. 27
#. None of the above
:::

::::

::::col
```python
def f(x,y=0):
	z = (x + 3) ** 2
	return y + z

x = 1
z = x + f(y=x,x=2)
print(z)

```

::::
::::::

## Summary of a Function Call 

:::{.incremental style='font-size:.8em'}
#. Evaluate the arguments in the context of the caller
#. Reserve space for the function in a new stack frame
#. Copy each positional argument to the corresponding parameter variable
#. Copy each keyword argument to the parameter with that name
#. For parameters with default values, if not already assigned, assign those values
#. Evaluate statements in the function body, using current stack frame to look up values of local variables
#. On encountering a `return`, compute the return value and substitute that value in place of the function call
#. Remove the stack frame
#. Return to the caller, continuing from just after the function call
:::


## Name Resolution and Scope
- When Python encounters a variable name in a program, it looks for where the variable was defined in an expanding search:
	1. **Local** - The local context is all the variables defined within the current function. This includes variables appearing as a parameter!
	2. **Enclosing** - The enclosing context consists of the names defined in a function enclosing the current one.
	3. **Global** - The global context consists of names defined outside of any function or imported into the current module.
	4. **Built-in** - The last place Python looks is in the names of any built-in functions, like `abs`, `str`, `print`, etc.
- The part of a program in which a name is defined in called its _scope_

## Scoping Example
```{.python data-line-numbers="" style='max-height:900px'}
def func1(x,y):
	return z + func2(x,y)

def func2(x,y):
	def func3(x):
		return (y + x) ** 2

	z = x - func3(y)
	return z - y

z = 1
print(func1(2,z))
```

## Local Variables
- In Python, assigning any value to a variable means that the variable is assumed to be _local_
	- This generally makes sense, as you would not want more specific functions overriding variables in other areas
- Can lead to issues though:
  ```{.python .badcode}
  def increment():
  	x = x + 1
  
  x = 0
  increment()
  ```
- The variable x in the fuction is local within that scope, and another ***global*** x with value 0 can cause issues

